---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-1.jpg
title: Intro to Geospatial Analysis with python
---

# Geospatial data analysis with GeoPandas

    “GeoPandas is an open source project to make working with geospatial data in python easier. GeoPandas extends the datatypes used by pandas to allow spatial operations on geometric types. Geometric operations are performed by shapely. Geopandas further depends on fiona for file access and descartes and matplotlib for plotting.”

### A simple folium Map
The main class object in `folium` is Map. The typical workflow is to init an 
instance of this class with a set of optional arguments, and then to add 
additional marker types to it after it is initialized by using either the Map
object's `.add_child()` function, or the `add_to()` function of other objects
that can act as children of a Map.

This concept of parent and child objects relates to the structure of the 
underlying code which is stored in a markup language. Remember, markup follows
a set of tags (<html>...</html>) nested within other tags. Thus, the map 
object is the outermost tag (<div id=map>...</div>), and other objects such 
as points that we want to appear on the map will be nested within the map id 
tag. In the `leaflet` JS code above you can see the structure is very similar,
and uses the call `addLayer` instead of `add_child`. In the folium syntax,
nested objects are referred to as children, or they can be children of its 
children, etc.

I tend to call my map instance variables something like `fmap`, since `map` 
is a reserved function name from the Python builtins. Here is a simple example
map generated by setting a center position in latitude longitude coordinates
and a zoom level.

```python
import folium
fmap = folium.Map(location=[40, -100], zoom_start=4)
fmap
```

<div>
<iframe
  style="display: block; margin: auto; width:100%; height:400px; margin-top:2%;"
  src="../images/folium-0.html">
</iframe>
</div>


Here is a slightly more complex example, which re-creates exactly the 
instructions in the JS example from above. In this case we set the name of the
tile set to use (more on this below), and we add a Marker, which appears as an
icon on the map at the specified coordinates. You can zoom in or out and the 
icon will remain visible. It also includes a popup that will appear when clicked.

You can see that I create the `marker` class instance as a separate object, and
then add it to the existing map by using the `.add_child` function call.
```python
import folium
location = [40.7401, -73.9891]
fmap = folium.Map(location, zoom_start=12, tiles="openstreetmap")
marker = folium.Marker(location, popup="End Point Corporation")
fmap.add_child(marker)
fmap
```

<div>
<iframe
  style="display: block; margin: auto; width:100%; height:400px; margin-top:2%;"
  src="../images/folium-1.html">
</iframe>
</div>


This could also be written another way, by using the `add_to()` function of
an object to set it as the child of some parent. This has the same effect as
above. In this case I think this way is a bit easier to read, but it depends
on the example.


```python
import folium
location = [40.7401, -73.9891]
fmap = folium.Map(location, zoom_start=12, tiles="openstreetmap")
marker = folium.Marker(location, popup="End Point Corporation").add_to(fmap)
fmap
```


### Tile layers (basemaps)
The tile layer set represents a form of `raster`, a bitmap image that is 
shown on the root of the page. By default `folium` supports a number of 
*free* tile sets that can referenced by name, and which you can find examples
of here: [https://leaflet-extras.github.io/leaflet-providers/preview/](
https://leaflet-extras.github.io/leaflet-providers/preview/). In addition
to the shortcut names for these tilemaps, they can be referenced in the form
of a URL like the following: `https://{s}.tile.openstreetmap.org/{z}/{x}/{y}.png`.

The format of a tile layer URL is that of a REST API. This is because tiles
are actually loaded dynamically by leaflet maps (and by other similar types
of map visualization tools like Google Maps). The `{s}` is the URL is for the
server name, the `{z}` is the level of zoom, and the `{x}` and `{y}` is for
the position on the globe. When you open a map, or change its zoom, or 
scroll to a new position on it, this triggers an event that will make a request
to the API to fetch new tiles. 

The sets of free tile layers usually vary in providing more or less details on 
roads, colors, land categories, and labels, but some goofy ones exist as well, 
such as this metal-themed tile set. As you can see in this case an API key is 
required to show full details without an overlay. This requires registering 
with the host, and is usually associated with keeping track of your usage so 
that your account doesn't hog all the request resources. As we'll see later,
you can even generate and host your own tile sets.

```python
fmap = folium.Map(
    location=[40, -100], 
    zoom_start=5, 
    tiles="https://{s}.tile.thunderforest.com/spinal-map/{z}/{x}/{y}.png",
    attr="http://www.thunderforest.com",  # the source of the tileset shown in the lower-right
    API_key='your.API.key',
)
fmap
```

<div>
<iframe
  style="display: block; margin: auto; width:100%; height:400px; margin-top:2%;"
  src="../images/folium-2.html">
</iframe>
</div>


### Other resources

Read more about what is possible with `folium` at the official documentation.
[folium docs](https://python-visualization.github.io/folium/index.html)

A similar alternative mapping tool that can be used in jupyter notebooks is
[ipyleaflet](https://github.com/jupyter-widgets/ipyleaflet). 


## Geographical vector objects

We learned previously that web-based images/plots are often composed of 
either `vector (code)` or `raster (bitmap)` type components. It turns out 
that maps like the leaflet/folium examples we created in the previous 
tutorial are actually composed of both. The underlying colored image is a 
raster, and the overlayed points, lines, and shapes are vectors. 

In this tutorial we will focus on how vector type data is created, used, and 
stored. And how it can serve as *data* for conducting scientific analyses. 
In the next tutorial we will examine how rasters can similarly be used as 
data. 


### Python geographical libraries
In this tutorial we will explore the use of several scientific libraries for
working with geospatial data in Python. Some of these provide similar functions,
but each has specific benefits and so it is worth becoming familiar with most
of these packages.

```bash
conda install folium geopandas shapely pyproj geojson -c conda-forge
```

```python
import folium
import geopandas
import shapely
import pyproj
import geojson
```


### GeoJSON format
[GeoJson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoJSON) is a *file format* used to 
store 'geometry' type objects, such as points, polygons, etc, that can be used 
to draw vectors markers/shapes onto a coordinate map. In other words, it is 
used to store the vector information for a geographic dataset in JSON format. 
Because JSON is very flexible it can be used by most modern geospatial 
libraries, and thus works across languages and systems.

GeoJson is composed of an array of `features` that can be grouped into 
a `FeatureCollection`. We'll demonstrate examples of creating, plotting, and 
saving GeoJSON files here. Please read the link above for more details on the 
GeoJSON format.


### Shapes with shapely

Shapely is simple but powerful library for computing distances, overlaps, 
areas, and other set or mathematical operations on points, lines, or shapes. 
The documentation is quite good [https://shapely.readthedocs.io/en/stable/manual.html](https://shapely.readthedocs.io/en/stable/manual.html). The base class objects 
here are very generalized and are used as dependencies in several other Python 
libraries, such as `geopandas`. 

Shapely geometry class objects are created by providing a set of coordinates 
in decimal latitude and longitude values to the class constructors. The 
class instances show an SVG representation of the data, and the instances can 
be used to access a suite of attributes and functions of geometry objects for 
doing calculations on geometries. Supported geometry types include all of those
in the GeoJSON spec, such as Points, Polygons, etc.

```python
# create a Point instance
shapely.geometry.Point(44.0, -74.5)

# create a Polygon instance
shapely.geometry.Polygon([
    (44,0, -74), (45.0, -75), (45.0, -76), (43.0, -76),
])
```

### Calculations with geometries
Simple calculations with geometries, such as the distance between them, or 
the area they occupy, can be easy to compute. But keep in mind the units that 
are being represented. Often you will need to take these results and translate
them into a particular coordinate projection system. This topic can be 
complicated, but there are nice libraries for doing it, such as the `pyproj` 
example below.

```python
# create two points
point1 = shapely.geometry.Point(44.0, -74.5)
point2 = shapely.geometry.Point(43.0, -73.5)

# get linear distance between points
linear_dist = point1.distance(point2)
print(f"linear unit-less distance: {linear_dist:.2f}")
```

```
linear unit-less distance: 1.41
```

Now we instead project these points to calculate the distance over the 
curvature of the Earth:
```python
# get geodetic (great circle) projection object
geod = pyproj.Geod(ellps='WGS84')

# get results of projecting points to new space
angle1, angle2, distance = geod.inv(point1.x, point1.y, point2.x, point2.y)

# print results (divide by 1000 to get in units of kms)
print(f"WGS84 distance in Kilometers: {distance / 1000:.2f}")
```
```
WGS84 distance in Kilometers: 115.77
```

### Creating GeoJSON files 
Shapely objects can be written to GeoJSON files, but there is another library
that is specialized for this purpose which I prefer, called `geojson`. 
Remember the format of GeoJSON includes three nested components: 
FeatureCollection, Features, and Geometries. The Geometry type objects, such 
as the Point in this example, can be `geojson` or `shapely.geometry` Point
objects. The `Feature` object stores the geometry along with metadata
(properties) that can be used later to fetch information to use for tooltips
or popups on your maps. Finally, one or more features can be grouped together
into a FeatureCollection.


```python
# create an empty Feature Collection
layer = geojson.FeatureCollection(features=[])

# create a point
point = geojson.Point((-115.81, 37.24))

# create a Feature that combines the point geometry with meta-info
feature = geojson.Feature(geometry=point, properties={"country": "Spain"})

# add the feature to the FeatureCollection (layer)
layer['features'].append(feature)

# add more features...
# layer['features'].append(...)

# show (dump) the JSON string
print(geojson.dumps(layer, indent=2))
```
The code above prints the following GeoJSON string. To create a JSON file
we would simply print this string to a file.
```
{
  "type": "FeatureCollection",
  "features": [
    {
      "type": "Feature",
      "geometry": {
        "type": "Point",
        "coordinates": [
          -115.81,
          37.24
        ]
      },
      "properties": {
        "country": "Spain"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Geopandas: working efficiently with geometries in Python

You can find a lot of geographic data available online as GeoJson files. 
I found this dataset with polygons for the outline shapes of countries and 
state data with a google search. 

The `geopandas` library provides a convenient interface to storing and 
accessing multiple features from a GeoJson file in Python. You just load 
the json file and then interact with it as you would any dataframe, where
the `geometry` column in this case contains `shapely` geometries.

```python
# fetch feature data from a large GeoJson file from a URL
geodata = geopandas.read_file("https://datahub.io/core/geo-ne-admin1/r/0.geojson")

# show the shape of the dataframe
print(geodata.shape)

# show the header of the dataframe
geodata.head()
```

### Create chloropleth (outlined shapes) by showing polygons on map
Here we use `folium` much like we did previously, only we add Markers to the 
map using a new folium object type, called `folium.GeoJson`. Here I use 
pandas indexing to select only a subset of shapes from the file, and I use
the `.get_bounds()` and `fit_bounds()` functions of the objects to get their
outer size to center on the map the added vectors. Finally, I add a LayerControl
object that allows for showing or hiding layers (see upper right toggle).

```python
# init a map instance
fmap = folium.Map()

# create a layer to hold several features
region = folium.FeatureGroup(name="Afghanistan")

# iterate over rows of 
for idx in geodata[geodata.country == "Afghanistan"].index:
    
    # init a GeoJson object from each geometry datum and add to afghan layer
    data = folium.GeoJson(
        data=geodata.loc[idx, "geometry"],
        tooltip=geodata.loc[idx, "name"],
    ).add_to(region)   
    
# add layer to the map
fmap.add_child(region)

# set bounds (location and zoom) on map to center on this region
fmap.fit_bounds(region.get_bounds())

# add layer toggle option
fmap.add_child(folium.LayerControl())

# show map
fmap
```


<div>
<iframe
  style="display: block; margin: auto; width:100%; height:400px; margin-top:2%;"
  src="./images/folium-3.html">
</iframe>
</div>


### GeoJSON embed vs link
Because GeoJSON is in the web friendly JSON format, you can actually create
maps that simply contains the URL to a GeoJSON file hosted on the internet
somewhere, rather than having to embed the JSON data itself into your JS 
Leaflet instructions. This can be useful when your dataset is composed of 
many many thousands of points, by reducing the size of the file that you 
need to host. Here is an example where I create a map using GeoJSON files
that are hosted elsewhere on my personal website. I simply reference the URL
of the dataset and include `embed=False`. The map looks the same, but the 
underlying HTML object that I would save at the end would be much smaller.

```python
# init a map instance
fmap = folium.Map(tiles="stamenterrain")

# add each species group to layer as JSON
folium.GeoJson(
    data="https://eaton-lab.org/data/lautum.json",
    embed=False,
    name="lautum",
).add_to(fmap)

folium.GeoJson(
    data="https://eaton-lab.org/data/acutifolium.json",
    embed=False,
    name="acutifolium",
).add_to(fmap)

folium.GeoJson(
    data="https://eaton-lab.org/data/caudatum.json",
    embed=False,
    name="caudatum"
).add_to(fmap)

# set bounds of grouped layer on map to center on this region
fmap.fit_bounds(fmap.get_bounds())

# add layer toggle option
fmap.add_child(folium.LayerControl())

# show the map
fmap
```


<div>
<iframe
  style="display: block; margin: auto; width:100%; height:400px; margin-top:2%;"
  src="./images/folium-4.html">
</iframe>
</div>



### Saving maps; what to do with maps?
You can save your map to HTML format:
```python
fmap.save("./my-map.html")
```

But sharing this map can actually be a bit tricky. 
The maps are meant to be viewed in the web,
and so the best way to share them is to save the HTML file and host it on the 
web somewhere and share the link. You can use GitHub for example. In the case
of this website I have saved the HTML files and then I embed them in other
pages like this one using an `iframe` HTML object. Another way is to take a 
screenshot of the map and embed it as a PNG or JPG, but of course you then
lose the interactivity features.

As we'll see in the next tutorial this becomes a more complex problem when 
working with non-free tile sets. In that case you can't easily just share your
links around the web, because there are limits on how many times your tiles
can be viewed/zoomed etc., and so for example Google requires users to be 
signed in in order to view the tiles sets. 